----- PAGE 9 -----

Unit 1.2

Vocabulary & Grammar

1 Say which of the following verbs are used with the following means of transport.

VERBS
catch get out of ride steer
miss get on(to) take disembark from
get in(to) get off drive board

MEANS OF TRANSPORT
a car a train a plane
a motorbike a boat a bus
a bicycle a ship a taxi

e.g. catch a bus/a train ... etc.

2 Choose the correct word.Which means of transport is each sentence about?

1 Takeoff was delayed/missed for over an hour because of bad weather.
2 The compartment was so populated/crowded I couldn't get a seat so I had to stand all the way.
3 I took a new direct route that was fast/speedy, so I reached my destination in no time.
4 The traffic/congestion on the motorway wasn't heavy, so it took us very little time to get there.
5 The crossing was rough/bumpy and we both got seasick.
6 We broke/fell down outside York and had to wait for over an hour before someone came to get us.

3 Choose the correct word.Then translate the sentences into Russian.

1 Last year we had the ......... to travel to China.
A occasion B opening C benefit D opportunity
2 We reached the airport with plenty of time to .......
A free B let C spare D spend
3 John spoke ......... of the service at this restaurant.
A strongly B greatly C highly D extremely
4 The location of the hotel was a major selling ......... of the holiday.
A detail B feature C point D aspect
5 The metro makes it easy to get around the ......... city centre.
A busy B full C loud D energetic
6 We ......... London just before 10 pm.
A reached B got C had D arrived
7 The minister will ......... an announcement later.
A do B have C form D make

8 When all is ......... and done, it's his decision.
A said B spoken C told D stated
9 There is a variety of marine life at the ......... of the sea.
A base B bed C depth D bottom
10 Our journey was a unique ......... experience.
A travel B tour C trip D journey

- Phrasal verbs

4 Fill in the appropriate particle. Check in Appendix I. Use the phrasal verbs in a story of your own.

1 Due to the heavy snow, no planes were able to take ......... .
2 Getting my money back when the flight was cancelled didn't make ......... missing an important meeting.
3 Even though we set ......... late we still made it to the airport in time.
4 The terrible flight has put me ......... travelling by plane again.
5 Whenever I go on a long trip my whole family sees me ......... at the airport.

5 RNE Complete gaps 1-6 with the correct derivative of each word in capitals.

When the Channel Tunnel opened, many people had high 1) ......... . Instead of travelling for up to 3 hours by sea, the tunnel appeared to be an 2) ......... alternative. However, the Channel Tunnel project ran into some unexpected 3) ......... . For example, nobody had imagined that there might be a power 4) ......... , leaving the passengers stranded in the tunnel for hours. 5) ......... , problems like this have been overcome and the tunnel now satisfies passengers' 6) ......... for a fast and enjoyable journey.

EXPECT
ATTRACT
DIFFICULT
FAIL
OBVIOUS
REQUIRE

----- PAGE 10 -----

- Comparatives/Superlatives (GR p. 159

6 Read the examples. Translate them into your language. Are there similar structures in your language? What are they?

He runs as fast as John.
She isn't half as skilled as her sister.
Motorbikes are faster than bicycles.
This car is less expensive than that one.
Petrol is more expensive than diesel.
It's getting hotter and hotter.
The earlier we leave, the sooner we'll arrive.
This is the fastest car I've ever driven.

7 In pairs, use the structures in Ex. 6 and the adjectives below to compare various means of transport: comfortable, safe, economical, polluting, fast, reliable, dangerous, expensive, convenient, tiring, cramped, pleasant, leisurely, inconvenient, slow, uncomfortable, relaxing etc.

e.g. A: Travelling by plane is faster and more comfortable than travelling by car.
B: However, travelling by car isn't as expensive as travelling by train.

- Relative clauses (GR p. 160

8 Fill in: where, whose, who, which, why.
Which of these words do we use for: people? things/animals? places? reason? possession?

Tenerife is a Spanish island 1) ... is situated off the coast of North Africa. Having visited many islands 2) ... the nightlife is not very lively, I was thrilled when I saw so many restaurants, cafés and discos in Tenerife. It is a stunning island 3) ... beauty captivates all those 4) ... go there. That is the reason 5) ... many people visit the island year after year.

9 Join the sentences with relative adverbs or adjectives.

1 The tourists were robbed. They are talking to the police.
2 John is going on holiday to Ibiza. It is one of the Balearic Islands.
3 This is the shop. You can buy cheap clothes there.
4 Where's the milk? It was in the fridge.
5 In 1995, Ben lived in London. He worked for The Times.
6 She tried on five skirts. None fitted her.
7 Bob is a vet. He is my neighbour.
8 He has three sisters. All of them are dentists.
9 I met a woman. Her son knows you.

10 RNE Complete gaps 1-7 with the correct form and tense of each verb in capitals.

DAVID COPPERFIELD

Audiences around the world consider David Copperfield to be the greatest magician of our time. Copperfield 1) ... born in the United States in 1956. He 2) ... performing magic at the age of 12 and became the youngest person ever admitted to the Society of American Magicians. At 16, he was teaching a magic course at New York University. He then began singing and performing magic on stage in Chicago. At the age of 19, he 3) ... a break in television with his own show. His career in the world of entertainment 4) ... off.
Since the 1970s, Copperfield 5) ... in Emmy award-winning television programmes, stage plays, films and personal tours. He 6) ... around the world and has elevated the art of magic to new heights. In addition to 7) ..., he created a Broadway show, Dreams & Nightmares, which broke all box-office records during its run in New York City. "The secret," says David, "is to consider nothing impossible, then start treating possibilities as probabilities."

Writing

11 THINK! Which means of transport do you prefer? Why? Spend three minutes writing about the topic.

----- PAGE 11 -----

Unit 1.3

Lead-in

1 a) Which sports can you see in the pictures? Which is your favourite one? How do you think people benefit from doing sports? Use the ideas to tell your partner.

b) Listen to a person discussing the questions above. Which of your points does he mention?

Sports are a great way to keep fit.

Team sports teach us how to work together to achieve a common goal.

Sports teach us to deal with success and failure.

Sports teach us to balance competitiveness.

Sports bring people together.

Sports help us relax.

2 In groups, discuss the proverb.
A healthy mind in a healthy body.

Study Skills

Text completion

Read the text through, then read the list of missing phrases. Start fitting the phrases into the gaps. Match the topic of the missing phrases with the topic of the phrase before and after each gap. Look for clues such as reference words (he, there, etc) or linking words (which, but, where, etc) before or after each gap. Check that the phrase you choose fits grammatically and makes sense. Read the completed text to see if it makes sense.

Reading

3 RNE Read the magazine article about the London Marathon. Choose the correct parts of sentences (A-G) to complete gaps 1-6. There is one extra part of a sentence you do not need to use. Compare answers with your partner. Then translate the first two paragraphs of the text into Russian.

----- PAGE 12 -----

THE LONDON MARATHON

Michael Scott talks about his success story of going from being a sickly teenager to a London Marathon competitor.

Growing up with a heart defect was difficult. While other kids my age were going to football practice and on beach holidays with their families, I was in and out of hospital. My only involvement in a sporting competition was watching it on the television.

One of my favourite events to watch was the London Marathon. When I was just 14, a man from London, named Chris Brasher, organised the first London Marathon. It was 29 March 1981 and 7,747 people were involved in the race. Over the years, I watched the event [1]. Now, there are 46,500 participants each year from all corners of the world and of all levels of ability. Many people say the marathon is the ultimate physical challenge. Athletes have to train physically and mentally for each marathon and be prepared for many challenges.

I always found it surprising to see how many well-trained athletes did not complete the course each year. Out of the over 46,000 starters, on average, only 33,000 actually crossed the finishing line. Some dropped out because of injury or illness, but most just 'hit the wall', an infamous experience suffered when their bodies simply ran out of fuel. For many runners, by the time they reached the 30 to 35 km point in the race, they just couldn't go any further. Their muscles would cramp and their heart and lungs could not obtain enough oxygen.

Each year, I tried to imagine what it would be like to line up before all the crowds and run the 42.2 km route [2]. The race started in Greenwich Park, then competitors would race along the River Thames, towards Big Ben, and eventually ending in front of Buckingham Palace.

I decided to talk to my heart specialist and find out if there was any chance that I could train my body to handle running 42.2 kms. At first, he thought I was joking, [3]. I began walking for a few minutes at a time, increasing my intensity until I was able to walk for 10 minutes a session. At the same time, I started lifting weights to build muscle strength.

Over the course of a year, I progressed from just walking to running. Running became a daily thing for me and I was building more strength and confidence with every step. My doctor was thrilled with my progress and allowed me to continue forward.

Finally, at the age of 19, the time came to apply for the London Marathon. I knew that only a certain number of people would be allowed to enter the race and as much as I wanted to do this, I knew that my chances were slim. The London Marathon is the most challenging marathon in the world. I couldn't believe how far I had come and that finally my dream would come true.

My doctor and I worked together to set out a training schedule [4]. Physically, I was fit and my heart appeared to be in good condition. The biggest problem would be dehydration, as it would be with all of the competitors. On average most of the runners take four to five hours to complete the race and water is essential to all of the competitors. The year before, 710,000 bottles of water had been consumed during the race!

Soon enough it was race day. My family, as well as various friends, were all gathered to watch and support me. It was the most difficult and the most exciting and rewarding experience of my life. I finished the race in less than six hours, [5].

Today, I am still running. I have not competed in the London Marathon again [6]. I enjoy taking part in the atmosphere and sharing my success story with the other athletes. I learned that as long as I try my best and have faith in myself I can do almost anything.

A but soon he realised how important this was to me
B that would allow me to safely complete the entire 42.2 kms
C but later that year he would regret his decision
D which has grown into the biggest of its kind in the world
E but I do volunteer each year to assist the athletes in any way I can throughout the race
F which runs along roads, up hills and around some of the most famous sights in London
G which was amazing since just a few years before I was barely able to run across the garden

4 Explain the words in bold. Then, in pairs, ask and answer questions based on the text.

Listening & Speaking

5 Listen as you read the text again. Which of the following qualities best describe Michael? Discuss it in pairs, giving reasons.
- determined • passionate • persistent • tolerant
- courageous • stubborn
e.g. Michael is very passionate because he cared so much about the marathon.

6 What would you do if you were Michael? Tell your partner.

----- PAGE 13 -----

Unit 1.4 Vocabulary & Grammar
1 Complete the exchanges. Use: team, go, score, dirty, win, played, postponed, live, home, lost.
1 A: It's a pity they .........
B: Yes, but everyone said it was a ....... game.
2 A: I've never ........... golf.
B: Why don't you have a ........... ?
3 A: Are they playing at ........... this week?
B: No – the game has been ........... because of the bad weather.
4 A: Do you think they'll ........... ?
B: If they ........... first, they'll have a chance.
5 A: Have you ever seen a ........... basketball match?
B: No. I don't like ........... sports.
- Word Power
(ways to walk)
2 a) Fill in: crawl, slip, creep, stagger, wander, stray, march, sprint, trip in the correct tense.
1 We watched the athletes ........... into the stadium waving their flags. (walk with regular steps as a group)
2 Gymnasts must be careful not to ........... when performing on the beam. (lose balance)
3 The racing driver ........... slowly out of the wreckage unharmed. (move on hands and knees)
4 Two hours after the end of the match, there were still a few fans ........... around outside the stadium. (walk aimlessly)
5 The thief ........... into the changing room to steal the athletes' valuables. (move quietly)
6 On hearing the starting pistol, she ........... towards the first hurdle. (run quickly)
7 The boxer had been hit so hard, he ........... across the ring and fell down. (walk unsteadily)
8 Tom had ........... into the wrong part of the stadium and was surrounded by fans of the other team. (wander away from a place)
9 If a horse ........... , the rider may fall off and be seriously injured. (knock one's foot against something and fall)
b) Read the joke. What does trip mean?
I took a trip to Paris last week.
Oh, what a shame. Did you hurt yourself?
3 Choose the correct word. Check in your dictionaries. Then translate the sentences into Russian.
1 The match was planned/settled/ fixed/agreed. They paid him to lose.
2 Many fans were damaged/broken/ injured/wounded when the wall fell.
3 The seating ability/capability/skill/ capacity of the stadium is 10,000.
4 His opponent/contestant/foe/ enemy in the final match was his best friend.
5 Jack finished the tennis match/ contest/race/tournament in first place.
6 He has faith/trust/belief/credit in himself and believes he'll make it.
7 I think their chances of beating their opponents are narrow/slim/ little/light.
8 Athletes must be in top physical state/way/situation/condition.
4 Complete the sentences with the words: were involved, handle, dropped out, obtain, defect, volunteer.
1 I have been helping out as a(n) ........... at the local marathon for over ten years now.
2 We didn't know that you ........... with coaching the ball team.
3 After you ........... your pass, you can go and meet the players.
4 The runner ........... of the race after he hurt his ankle.
5 Because of his age, he didn't think he would be able to ........... the stress of the race.
6 She was born with a heart ........... and must be very careful when doing sports.
- Win/Gain
5 Fill in: win or gain. Make sentences using them.
1 win the election
2 ........... an argument
3 ........... weight
4 ........... experience
5 ........... a competition
6 ........... a medal
7 ........... speed
8 ........... one's freedom
e.g. He didn't manage to win the election.